You're looking at some footage I shot
with this 8 mm film, the smallest film
format available using a camera that
looks like this. And you'll immediately
notice a difference if I cut from the 8
mm footage to a clip from Sinners, which
was shot on IMAX 70mm, the largest
commercial film format available. If you
watch this channel or are a film nerd,
you probably are already familiar with
some of the benefits of IMAX film. Maybe
you've even seen the video where Ryan
Cougler explains the different types of
cameras and film Sinners was shot on.
And you might be thinking, "Yeah, yeah,
okay. Sinners was shot on film and it
was shot on big film. What's the big
deal? Isn't this just a detail that film
nerds care about?" Well, glad you asked.
Because to understand why the
cinematography of sinners grabs us and
feels so different, we need to
understand exactly how large formats
like IMAX film actually change the
image. So that even when you watch it on
a smaller screen at home, that choice
can still have a psychological impact on
how the viewer perceives the film.
Centers is a rare thing these days. An
entirely original blockbuster,
thematically rich, wildly entertaining,
and from a technical perspective, the
first film of its kind. This film
swallows you. You're immediately
immersed in these beautiful, expansive
images.
But what makes an image in a movie grab
you and pull you in? While big moments
like this are undeniably cool, in
sinners, even an image as seemingly
unassuming as this one or this one,
where it may seem like not much is going
on with the camera, there are small,
almost unnoticeable details that affect
the psychological impact of the image.
Let me explain what I mean. Maybe you've
seen the trend on social media where
people showcase that your front-facing
camera on your phone has been lying to
you. The premise is that you get used to
looking at the way your face looks when
it's filmed through the front-facing
camera, not realizing that the
wide-angle lens of your front camera
distorts the shape of your face. And
then if you cut from that wide angle to
a more telephoto angle, which is closer
to how we see faces in real life, the
difference is dramatic. Studies have
shown that we perceive the same face
with less lens distortion as more
attractive and even more trustworthy and
competent. But what does this have to do
with the cinematography of sinners?
It's easy to think that increasing the
size of the film, going from a smaller
to larger format just means more
resolution, like the jump from HD to 4K
with digital film making. But while
larger film formats do increase
resolution, they also change the image
in other important ways. Probably the
most immediately noticeable is how
larger formats have shallower depth of
field, making the part of the image
that's in focus narrower and making the
background blurriier. If you look at
footage shot on a small format, like 8
or 16 mm, you can see how most of the
image is usually in focus. Everything in
this shot from the subject in the
foreground to the mountains in the
background are in focus at the same
time. But with 70 millimeter, even in a
fairly wide shot like this one or this
one, you can get shallow depth of field
that would normally be difficult or
impossible to achieve on wider shots
like this with smaller formats. But why
does this matter? Well, this means the
camera has a greater ability to direct
where your eye will be looking within
the frame. Like in this shot where the
camera quickly racks focus from the
house closer to the bottom of the frame
moments before the vampire drops in from
the top, leading your eye to where he'll
be landing. Technically, you could be
looking at whatever you want in the
shot, but most people's eyes are
naturally pulled towards what's in focus
without them even noticing that's
happening. So during this sequence,
where your eye is looking is directed by
the focus guiding you from one character
to another through the chaotic dance
floor. Here focus is in the foreground
so that when the ballet dancer lands in
the frame, our eyes are immediately
tracking with her before following the
momentum of the shot forward to the
hip-hop dancer and then landing on
Sammy. On shots this wide with smaller
formats, the focus shifts would be much
less noticeable, which is sometimes what
you want. But in this case, the focus
itself becomes a part of the dance and
flow leading your eyes through the dance
floor and around the frame with the same
rhythm of the shot and the music,
increasing this feeling that you're
gripped by this almost supernatural
force that's guiding your eyes as you
watch the sequence. Of course, you're
not going to think about this
consciously while you're watching this
scene. You're just caught up in the
moment. That's the power of great
direction and film making. It can shape
your attention and guide it towards a
feeling without you even noticing. Quick
sidebar here. The skill it takes to pull
focus, especially during takes like
this, is impressive. Camera assistants
like Ethan McDonald, who pulled focus
for this shot, almost never get talked
about, but they perform an integral role
on a film set that takes a lot of skill
and focus. You have to hit the marks
perfectly, take after take, and any
mistake could potentially ruin a shot.
For this sequence, Macdonald told
American cinematographer that there were
so many moving parts that each take was
slightly different. So, he had to pull
focus on the fly visually from up on the
balcony, adapting to the rhythm and
movement of each shot and thinking about
how to guide the audience's eye through
the chaos. But shallow depth of field
and how it guides your eye isn't the
only way large format film changes the
image. There are other more subtle and
complex effects that have just as much
impact.
Let's say the setting and location are a
very important part of your story. And
in certain shots, you want a wide frame
that includes the world surrounding the
characters. One way you could shoot a
wider image and include more of the
surroundings would be simply to use a
wide-angle lens. But remember how a
wide-angle lens distorts faces? Maybe we
want to avoid that. So instead, you
could get more of the surroundings in
the shot simply by moving the camera
further away from the subject. But when
you do this, because the camera is so
far away, you lose the ability to move
it freely through the scene. The third
option, and the one that gives you the
visual coverage of a wide angle while
letting you use more telephoto lenses
that don't distort faces, is to shoot on
a larger format, which produces a larger
image without the distortion of a
wide-angle lens. This is how on large
formats, the faces can feel like they
were shot on a telephoto lens while the
size of the shot remains wide enough to
include the environment and locations
that surround the character. And this
produces an interesting effect because
we associate the look of a telephoto
lens with close-ups. And close-ups
throughout cinema history are used for
more intimate, personal, and emotional
moments. On average, large format
cinematography has this unique ability
to convey a sense of emotional intimacy
even in these wider and medium shots,
creating a beautiful effect where we
feel both close to the character
emotionally while we still maintain
sight of the expansive world that
surrounds them. And that's part of why
some of the images in sinners and other
films shot on IMAX like Oenheimer have
this kind of magical feeling that it's
hard to put a finger on even in what
feel like pretty straightforward
portrait shots because it truly is
visually unlike most other images you
see on a day-to-day basis.
These large format IMAX images are
magical, but they come at a cost. IMAX
is wildly inconvenient to shoot on. The
cameras are massive, super heavy, and so
loud that any dialogue from the scenes
you shoot with them is basically
unusable, meaning you have to get the
actors to redub their lines for any of
the IMAX shots. Besides actual financial
cost, this is the main reason almost
nobody actually shoots an entire movie
on IMAX film. It's just not practical.
So, you have to use it where it makes
sense and then fill in the gaps with a
different format of film. Usually, to
fill in these gaps, the go-to choice is
either IMAX digital or another 70 mm
film format that's a little smaller and
quieter. What makes sinners the first
movie of its kind in film history is the
other format Cougler chose which was
ultra panovision 70 mm. A super wide
anamorphic format that is much less
commonly used than spherical 70mm
formats. Ultra panovision is so rare
that only 10 films have ever been made
entirely in the format. Nine of them
like the epic Ben Hur were shot in the
1950s and then Ultra Panovision lost
popularity and the special equipment
used to make it went into storage. That
is until Robert Richardson, Tarantino
cinematographer, found the old lenses
laying around Panovision headquarters
and had them refurbished, resurrecting a
lost piece of film history and using it
to shoot the hateful 8. Ultra Panovision
is great for wide vistas and blocking
groups of characters together. While not
quite as big as IMAX 70 millimeter,
ultra panovision is still a very large
format and has many of the qualities of
large format cinematography we've
already talked about. In addition to
this, stretching the image wider using
anamorphic lenses also helps maintain
the intimacy we feel with telephoto
shots while still including the
surroundings on the edges. So, not only
did Sinners continue the legacy of a
super rare film format, but it became
its own piece of history by being the
first movie to combine ultra panavision
with IMAX 70mm film. And it's a bold
combo because while IMAX is one of the
tallest film formats ever made, Ultra
Panavision is one of the widest ever
made. This meant that the transitions
between the two formats to avoid being
distracting and jarring would have to be
timed and used very intentionally.
Why does any of this stuff really
matter?
These are photographs taken by the
American Farm Security Administration in
the 1930s and 40s.
These images document the rural south
where sinners is set. We see open
horizons, dusty foregrounds, and small
human figures against expansive
landscapes.
These images were a key visual
touchstone for S's director Ryan Cougler
and his cinematographer Autumn Derald
Archipal and much of the world of the
film grounds us in this reality. It's
perhaps a little cliche to call a
location a character in a film, but here
I think it really is. Sinners is not
just a vampire story. It's using the
vampire mythology to express and comment
on true and real historical oppression
and exploitation and cultural eraser.
The actual historical environment that
surrounds these characters isn't just a
pretty background for the action. It
grounds the film in its historical
context and reality. Being able to use
wider frames that include more of this
world in addition to showing us the
world also captures the actual feeling
of expansiveness and isolation that you
get looking at these old photographs and
which I have to assume captures some of
the feeling of expansiveness and
isolation that people would have felt
living in that time and place. I think
it's interesting to note here that a lot
of old photography also tends to be shot
on larger format film while many of the
cameras we shoot on today especially
with our phones use very tiny formats
much closer to 8 mm than 70. So we also
associate the look of larger format film
with the past and because ultra
panovision has rarely been used in
contemporary film making we also
associate that look with the past.
Sinners is grounded in history not just
through this look but because in some
cases they were literally using the same
film equipment as filmmakers of the
past. And not to put too fine a point on
all of this, but I think the artistic
production of Sinners and how it fuses
the past and the present mirrors the
film's thematic heart. So when Deral
tells American cinematographer that
these 70mm formats immerses you in the
character's mindset, it's not a gimmick
or empty hype. The feeling of the images
created by 70 mm film is actually
helping convey the feeling of the time
and the place the film is set in. and
what the characters are experiencing in
the film itself. Literally grabbing your
eye, pulling you into the frame, and
helping to transport you into the story
and back in time.
[Music]
But while it might sound like it, I
don't say all this to romanticize or
glorify shooting on large format film or
even shooting on film in general. My
goal here is not to say that shooting
this way is always the best choice for
every movie. It's obviously not.
Instead, what I want to romanticize, if
anything, is making the choices that
will best convey the story you're trying
to tell. This is less about highlighting
how cool IMAX and Ultra Panovision are.
Although I do think they're cool, it's
more about highlighting how much
intention and artistry can go into a
decision like what format to shoot on.
something most people who watch a film
aren't going to consciously think about
or even notice, but which affects how
they perceive the movie. Anyway, before
he decided to shoot on large format,
Cubler briefly considered shooting
centers on 16 mm until he realized that
the grainy image would make the VFX
needed for the twin effect too
difficult. And there's some part of me
that would have loved to see that
version of the story because it would
have definitely felt very different. I
ultimately love where the film ended up
and the look of large format film, but
sometimes 16 millimeter is the right
choice for the story you're trying to
tell. Or sometimes even an iPhone can be
the best way to shoot your story. It's
just about understanding the visual
language of these choices, what they
convey to the audience, and how to use
that to your advantage as a storyteller.
It's not about certain creative or
technical decisions being somehow
objectively better than others. It's
about understanding how the choices you
make as an artist shape the story you're
telling and which ones will make the
film work together as a cohesive whole,
grabbing the audience and pulling them
into your cinematic world.
Christopher Nolan throughout his career
has been the biggest proponent of
shooting on 70 mm IMAX, but his very
first film following was shot on 16 mm.
Not only is it a fun movie, but it's a
fascinating look at where Nolan started
out and how his filmm has changed over
his career. And you can watch following
right now on Movie, my sponsor for this
video. Movie is an online handcurated
streaming cinema that curates movies
from all around the world. It's one of
the best places to find artouse
international and indie films that you
won't find anywhere else. In addition to
Nolan's following, right now you can
watch the entire Twin Peaks series,
which I'm a huge fan of. So check all
that out right now when you go to
movie.com/thomasflight
and get your extended 30-day free trial.
Again, you can get that extended 30-day
free trial by clicking the link in the
description or going to
mubi.com/thomasflight.
Thanks again to Movie for sponsoring
this video.
[Music]